Convergence-divergence zones might be the neural networks where memories are
stored and retrieved. Considering that there are several kinds of memory,
depending on types of represented knowledge, underlying mechanisms, processes
functions and modes of acquisition, it is likely that different brain areas
support different memory systems and that they are in mutual relationships in
neuronal networks: "components of memory representation are distributed widely
across different parts of the brain as mediated by multiple neocortical
circuits".

Encoding of working memory involves the spiking of individual neurons
induced by sensory input, which persists even after the sensory input
disappears (Jensen and Lisman 2005; Fransen et al. 2002). Encoding of episodic
memory involves persistent changes in molecular structures that alter synaptic
transmission between neurons. Examples of such structural changes include
long-term potentiation (LTP) or spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP). The
persistent spiking in working memory can enhance the synaptic and cellular
changes in the encoding of episodic memory.

Working memory. Recent functional imaging studies detected working memory
signals in both medial temporal lobe (MTL), a brain area strongly associated
with long-term memory, and prefrontal cortex (Ranganath et al. 2005),
suggesting a strong relationship between working memory and long-term memory.
However, the substantially more working memory signals seen in the prefrontal
lobe suggest that this area play a more important role in working memory than
MTL.

Consolidation and reconsolidation. Short-term memory (STM) is temporary and
subject to disruption, while long-term memory (LTM), once consolidated, is
persistent and stable. Consolidation of STM into LTM at the molecular level
presumably involves two processes: synaptic consolidation and system
consolidation. The former involves a protein synthesis process in the medial
temporal lobe (MTL), whereas the latter transforms the MTL-dependent memory
into an MTL-independent memory over months to years (Ledoux 2007). In recent
years, such traditional consolidation dogma has been re-evaluated as a result
of the studies on reconsolidation. These studies showed that prevention after
retrieval affects subsequent retrieval of the memory.

These findings on reconsolidation fit with the behavioral evidence that
retrieved memory is not a carbon copy of the initial experiences, and memories
are updated during retrieval.
