Memory is often understood as an informational processing system with explicit
and implicit functioning that is made up of a sensory processor, short-term (or
working) memory, and long-term memory. This can be related to the neuron.
The sensory processor allows information from the outside world to be sensed in
the form of chemical and physical stimuli and attended to various levels of
focus and intent. Working memory serves as an encoding and retrieval processor.
Information in the form of stimuli is encoded in accordance with explicit or
implicit functions by the working memory processor. The working memory also
retrieves information from previously stored material. Finally, the function of
long-term memory is to store data through various categorical models or
systems.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory

We can also speculate that every cell has a memory and memory encoded in DNA.

Declarative memory requires conscious recall, in that some conscious process
must call back the information. It is sometimes called explicit memory, since
it consists of information that is explicitly stored and retrieved.

Declarative memory can be further sub-divided into semantic memory, concerning
principles and facts taken independent of context; and episodic memory,
concerning information specific to a particular context, such as a time and
place. Semantic memory allows the encoding of abstract knowledge about the
world, such as "Paris is the capital of France". Episodic memory, on the other
hand, is used for more personal memories, such as the sensations, emotions, and
personal associations of a particular place or time.

In contrast, procedural memory (or implicit memory) is not based on the
conscious recall of information, but on implicit learning. It can best be
summarized as remembering how to do something. Procedural memory is primarily
employed in learning motor skills and should be considered a subset of implicit
memory. It is revealed when one does better in a given task due only to
repetition â€“ no new explicit memories have been formed, but one is
unconsciously accessing aspects of those previous experiences

Brain areas involved in the neuroanatomy of memory such as the hippocampus, the
amygdala, the striatum, or the mammillary bodies are thought to be involved in
specific types of memory. For example, the hippocampus is believed to be
involved in spatial learning and declarative learning, while the amygdala is
thought to be involved in emotional memory.

In general, the more emotionally charged an event or experience is, the better
it is remembered; this phenomenon is known as the memory enhancement effect.

Hebb distinguished between short-term and long-term memory. He postulated that
any memory that stayed in short-term storage for a long enough time would be
consolidated into a long-term memory. Later research showed this to be false.
Research has shown that direct injections of cortisol or epinephrine help the
storage of recent experiences. This is also true for stimulation of the
amygdala. This proves that excitement enhances memory by the stimulation of
hormones that affect the amygdala. Excessive or prolonged stress (with
prolonged cortisol) may hurt memory storage.
