In the context of language, self-reference is used to denote a statement that
refers to itself or its own referent. The most famous example of a
self-referential sentence is the liar sentence: “This sentence is not true.”
Self-reference is often used in a broader context as well. For instance, a
picture could be considered self-referential if it contains a copy of itself
(see the animated image above); and a piece of literature could be considered
self-referential if it includes a reference to the work itself. In philosophy,
self-reference is primarily studied in the context of language. Self-reference
within language is not only a subject of philosophy, but also a field of
individual interest in mathematics and computer science, in particular in
relation to the foundations of these sciences.

The philosophical interest in self-reference is to a large extent centered
around the paradoxes. A paradox is a seemingly sound piece of reasoning based
on apparently true assumptions that leads to a contradiction. The liar sentence
considered above leads to a contradiction when we try to determine whether it
is true or not. If we assume the sentence to be true, then what it states must
be the case, that is, it cannot be true. If, on the other hand, we assume it
not to be true, then what it states is actually the case, and thus it must be
true. In either case we are led to a contradiction. Since the contradiction was
obtained by a seemingly sound piece of reasoning based on apparently true
assumptions, it qualifies as a paradox. It is known as the liar paradox.

Famous paradoxes:

 - Is “heterological” heterological?
 - The least number that cannot be referred to by a description containing less than 100 symbols
 - The real number whose n th decimal place is 1 whenever the n th decimal place of the number denoted by the n th phrase is 0; otherwise 0.
 - Russell’s paradox
 - This sentence is not known by anyone.
 - Zeno's paradoxes

They all have similar structure

R ∈ R ⇔ R ∈ { x ∣ x ∉ x } ⇔ R ∉ R

These paradoxes won't contradict if we adopt Dialetheism principle, that every
statement could be true and false. Or put it another way can be True on one
instance and False on another. In caontrast to bivalent condition.

Gödel’s theorem can be interpreted as demonstrating a limitation in what can be
achieved by purely formal procedures. It says that if first-order arithmetic is 
ω-consistent (which it is believed to be), then there must be arithmetical
sentences that can neither be proved nor disproved by the formal procedures of
first-order arithmetic.

The limitation result of Gödel’s theorem is closely related to another
limitation result known as the undecidability of the halting problem. This is a
result stating that there are limitations to what can be computed. We will
present this result in the following. The result is based on the notion of a
Turing machine, which is a generic model of a computer program running on a
computer having unbounded memory. Thus any program running on any computer can
be thought of as a Turing machine (see the entry on Turing machines for more
details). When running a Turing machine, it will either terminate after a
finite number of computation steps, or will continue running forever. In case
it terminates after a finite number of computation steps we say that it halts.
The halting problem is the problem of finding a Turing machine that can decide
whether other Turing machines halt or not.

There exists no Turing machine deciding the halting problem.

The central role played by self-reference in all of them makes them even harder
to accept, and definitely more puzzling. 
